# Exercise 4.1 Make Blinky

## Instructions
On your final project board, make blinky for yourself. Then add a button to turn the LED on and off. Bonus points for making the button cause an interrupt. Triple bonus points for debouncing the button signal.

What are the hardware registers that cause the LED to turn on and off? (From the processor manual, don’t worry about initialization.) What are the button registers that you read? Can you read that memory directly and see the button change in a debugger or by printing out the associated memory?

## Blinky Submission

Source for Blinky is in `rj_blink2` in this directory.

### Description

The project was generated using the STM32CubeIDE tools with the Discovery board selected. Most of the pins on the MCU are configured for the various hardware on the board, including the user button and 2 LEDs.

I've found that the easiest way to keep an STM32Cube project untanged from the generated code is to create a second app/main file and do as little as possible in the generated sources. This way, the ioc file can still be used to change settings and regenerate sources.

For now, I'm only using the CM7 core on this dual core beast, but I did have to figure out how to get both cores debugging for things to work right. The generated startup code only works when both cores start simultaneously. See the notes section below for info on setting that up.

The interesting assignment stuff happens in `rj_blink2/CM7/Core/Src/blinky.c` starting with `blinkyMain()`. There isn't much going on for blinky, so I have not broken up the architecture into multiple files, as the book's blinky had done. Anything that touches HAL is wrapped in a function to give it some meaning though.

Software button debouncing happens via the periodic sampling method. The button is sampled during the existing SysTick 1ms timer interrupt, and the button state struct is updated with events and state flags that can be used in the main loop thread.

The button debounce logic is using a library that I've previously written. For more info, see `button.h`. I'll include it's ASCII timing diagram here, since I think it's pretty cool and shows off some of the neat features.

```
Timing Diagram
                                    Hold Time
                                    <------------->
              <--->            <--->
              Debounce Time    Debounce Time
Input    +-+  +-------+        +----------------------+
       +-+ +--+       +--------+                      +-----------+
                      Debounce Time                   Debounce Time
                      <--->                           <--->

isDown            +-------+        +----------------------+
       +----------+       +--------+                      +-------+

isHeld                                            +-------+
       +------------------------------------------+       +-------+

downEvent         +                +
       +----------+----------------+------------------------------+

upEvent                   +                               +
       +------------------+-------------------------------+-------+

clickEvent                +
       +------------------+---------------------------------------+

holdEvent                                         +
       +------------------------------------------+---------------+

releaseEvent                                              +
       +--------------------------------------------------+-------+

```

I didn't manage to avoid creeping in at least one feature. If you hold the button instead of press it quickly, the second LED is toggled.

### Registers

In the code, I use HAL along with port and pin definitions matching labels defined in the ioc file, which was pre-set when I started the project based on the discovery board.

To read the button state directly, we can use the `IDR` (input data) register for the appropriate GPIO port, and look for the appropriate bit. The button is on PC13, which is bit `13` of the `C` GPIO port. ST headers define a `GPIOC` global struct with an `IDR` field.  ST also provides defines for bit manipulation, with a copy for each register! While perhaps a bit overkill, it does allow you to use meaningful names instead of magic numbers. For example, instead of checking the `IDR` value against `(1 << 13)`, you could use `GPIO_IDR_ID13`.

To read the button, you could use any of these expressions:

```c
//HAL driver
HAL_GPIO_ReadPin(B1_GPIO_Port, B1_Pin) == GPIO_PIN_SET

//CMSIS helper macro
READ_BIT(GPIOC->IDR, GPIO_IDR_ID13) != 0

(GPIOC->IDR & GPIO_IDR_ID13) != 0

(GPIOC->IDR & (1 << 13)) != 0

//or if you really prefer hex
(*(volatile uint32_t *)0x58020810) & 0x2000) != 0
```

To toggle the LED directly, we could do it in a number of ways. LED1 aka `LD1` is pin `2` of port `J`. To toggle it's state, we could either remember its last state in our code and set/unset it accordingly, or read the `ODR` register to see what it is currently set as.

To change it to the new state, we could then write a modified value back to `ODR`, though we might clobber some bits since we have read, modified, then written this register in 3 steps. If it were updated via an interrupt or DMA or something inbetween those steps, we could end up overwriting those changes to unrelated pins!

The GPIO ports have a `BSSR` register that can be used to set or reset any combination of the 16 bits in `ODR` without modifying the other bits accidentally. The lower 16 bits will set a GPIO, while the upper 16 bits will reset it.

The trick the HAL driver uses for `HAL_GPIO_TogglePin()` is clever, so I'll include that here:

```c
  /* get current Output Data Register value */
  uint32_t odr = GPIOx->ODR;

  /* Set selected pins that were at low level, and reset ones that were high */
  GPIOx->BSRR = ((odr & GPIO_Pin) << GPIO_NUMBER) | (~odr & GPIO_Pin);```
```


## Notes

#### Pinout Details from Cube:

Position | Name | Type | Signal | Label
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
E3 | PC13 | Input | GPIO_Input | B1 [Blue PushButton]
T6 | PJ2 | Output | GPIO_Output | LD1 [Red* Led]
H2 | PI13 | Output | GPIO_Output	| LD2 [Green* Led]

*- This is wrong. ST has swapped the colors and the board doesn't match the generated code definitions: PJ2 is green, and PI13 is red. For what it's worth, the schematic matches reality.


#### Stuff that wasn't obvious

Setting up Cube IDE for multiple cores:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k3mXhPZSasw

Oh, click both debug sessions to unpause at the same time, or the m7 times out and things go sideways.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ccHJjlhFHFs

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jI1k6p-fduE
